<p>
The first photo was posted this week by Willard Selkirk on the "I am From Chateaugay, New York" page. It is of the interior of one of the District Schools in Chateaugay. It is believed to be the school at the Forge. Note the design elements in the photo above; the tin ceiling, the moldings, high ceilings, and large windows (although the shades are drawn in this image). This image prodded my memories of school built in Chateaugay. Eventually referred to as the "old school", it sat on the east end of Church Street and began as the Chateaugay Academy which was built in 1879 (see second photo). Over the years, several additions were constructed. By the 1940s and '50s it was just referred to as "Chateaugay High School" (see third photo). It was closed in the fall of 1954, when the new Chateaugay Central School was opened on River Street. When centralization took place all of the 17 small, District (or "Country") Schools were closed, and all students eventually attended the new River Street complex (see fourth photo for a map of the 17 District Schools). The school on Church Street was considered as state-of-the-art when it was built in 1879 and the major additions that followed kept the building in top repair and filled with the latest educational resources and design details. The fifth and sixth photos show views from inside the "Old School" - the first is looking down on the main entrance as students were entering and the second is the music room. The seventh photo shows one of the elementary classrooms. The eighth image shows the old building during demolition in 1958. The final two photos are of the Church Street grounds after the old building had been demolished. Who knows how many hundreds (or thousands) of us skated at the rink on the Old School grounds? Kids would skate until their feet were too cold to continue, go into the skating house to warm up next to the stove, and go right back out and skate some more. Music blared from the speakers outside the skating house, the clear winter sky would display its twinkle of countless stars overhead, and skaters would go around and around on the rock-hard ice that was kept in prime condition by Doug Barnes, Jack Rosen, and so many others who ran the operation over the years. Cold conditions, but many, many warm memories of Chateaugay back in the day!!
</p>